So good afternoon.
Thanks for coming to
Advances in Modern OpenGL.
My name is Kent Miller, and, uh,
Let's just dive right in.
As a way to kind of frame
our discussion today,
spend a second talking about past OpenGL.
So, past OpenGL, you know, early '90s,
kind of looked like this.
Immediate mode,
multiple calls per vertex,
and allowed you to do neat
things like lit shaded whales.
At that point,
a lot of the OpenGL pipeline
was implemented in software.
A lot of the real-time
bottleneck was spent doing
computation on the incoming data,
vertex transformation, lighting.
All that kind of stuff.
Contrasted to today, all that computation
is more or less free.
And the way applications use OpenGL is
to just bombard the card with data.
Big textures, lots of them,
lots of geometry.
Sometimes the textures and
geometry change per frame.
So the bottlenecks really moved
to becoming a data management
problem to get the best performance
out of the graphics system.
So we just talked about immediate mode,
but today a well-performing application
will use vertex buffer objects and
vertex arrays to use little function
calls to specify the vertex data
And instead of fixed function OpenGL,
modern apps are using shaders.
All the current graphics hardware,
when you use fixed function OpenGL,
it just internally makes a
shader out of your state anyway.
So a lot of times it's more
straightforward and executes
quicker on the graphics card to
just make your own shader to do
exactly what you want it to do.
Many function calls to change state.
So instead of doing that,
a modern application will use buffer
objects and all the other types of
objects in the system that allow
you to change state in batches.
And programs allow you to switch,
you know, from one complete transform
state to another one.
And instead of making multiple calls
to change the fixed function state.
Instead of blocking calls for pixel data,
so to specify or get something
back from the graphics card,
modern applications use pixel buffer
objects to do that asynchronously.
We'll talk about that a little bit.
Then an old way to do off-screen
drawing was to use P buffers,
which were platform-specific and
worked differently on OS X than
it worked on other platforms.
But today,
OpenGL provides framebuffer objects,
which allow you to do a lot of the
same things in a cross-platform way.
So, in this session,
we're going to talk about keeping
the graphics cards busy and a
couple different ways to do that.
The Buffer Object API will cover
to allow you to manage your
memory in the graphics system and
provide updates to your data in a way
that doesn't block the drawing pipeline.
We're going to talk about how to
generate data using the graphics card,
capture intermediate results,
and feed them back into the system.
And then we're going to talk about
some more new OpenGL APIs that allow
you to manipulate the intermediate
results on the graphics card
without any round trips to the CPU.
And then I'm going to show a little
example of using OpenGL with OpenCL,
using OpenCL compute kernels
to generate some data and then
using OpenGL to visualize it.
So here we go with buffer objects.
So first let's talk about
vertex buffer objects.
Vertex buffer objects
encapsulates vertex state,
vertex array state.
And it allows you to do two things
that you really can't do any other way.
One is that it allows you
to tell OpenGL when you're
going to change the data.
If OpenGL doesn't know when
the data in your vertex array
is going to be modified,
it really has no choice but
to use it in place every time.
And that's not good for performance.
And then it also has a
memory management policy,
APIs that allow you to hint to
OpenGL how you're going to use
that vertex buffer object so it
can store it in an optimal place.
Also allows you to update your
data in a non-blocking way.
So when you start to
think about the computer,
so it's a diagram,
simple diagram of the computer.
There's a bus between the CPU through
the system controller to the RAM,
and CPU to the GPU,
and GPU to GPU memory.
But, you know,
there's -- you can't directly access
the RAM from the -- from the GPU.
You have to go through
the system controller.
So that leads to a trade-off depending
on what you want to do with your data.
If you store the data right
there in the system RAM,
then it's great for
your program to access.
It can quickly manipulate
anything it wants to there.
But the drawback to that is the
GPU doesn't have direct access to it.
It has to go through the
system controller and either,
you know,
directly access the data in small
chunks or make a copy up to the
-- up to the GPU to use that data.
On the other hand, if you store the data
in the graphics card,
that's great for the GPU,
but if you want to
modify it with the CPU,
then that's not going to be a good idea.
But if you store the data
in the graphics card,
and the GPU is in the graphics card,
then it takes more time.
You either have to update
it and copy it or do,
you know, slower writes through the
GPU to the GPU memory.
[Transcript missing]
And if you want to update the
data in a vertex buffer object,
there's really three ways to do it.
We're going to go over
some code with this.
So just spend a second here.
You can use the map and
un-map buffer pair together.
Buffer sub data allows you with one
call to pass a small amount of data
into the system and it will update your
buffer in place and do all that for you.
And then Apple has an
OS 10 specific extension,
flush buffer range,
which allows you to take responsibility
for telling GL which part of
your vertex data you modified.
And that allows it to copy just
little bits of it and send that
to the graphics card as opposed to
the entire vertex buffer object.
And it can have a good
effect on performance,
which we'll show in a second.
If you want to think about this,
just why do you have to
use a vertex buffer object?
The OpenGL standard allows you
with the vertex array usage,
so the same vertex array that's
been in forever in OpenGL,
you can really just change the
data at any point and GL is
expected to pick up the change.
So in this little piece of code there,
you call drawArrays to a set of data
you defined and then your program
is going to go off and modify it.
And then when you call drawArrays again,
OpenGL is expected to
get your modifications.
So what that leads to is that
OpenGL really has to read your
data every time it needs access
to any particular piece of it,
you know, the X vertex for this point.
It's got to read it out of memory again.
So, this chart was a little data that
we took to show the difference.
The previous slide said that draw
arrays was fancy immediate mode and
this slide really illustrates that.
So,
you can see the yellow and red line on
the chart are similar performance curves.
The yellow line is just
using immediate mode.
So, even at the largest batch sizes,
you can see that it behaves similarly
in performance to the draw arrays call.
The blue line is using static VBOs.
So, the data was able to be
copied to the graphics card.
GL was assured that the data wasn't
going to be modified when you used it.
And so,
it was able to not make any copies and
just read straight from its cache copy,
which allows the performance
as the batch sizes get big to
really have some legs there.
So this is a simple code,
simple piece of code,
and I'm showing it to contrast
it to using flush buffer range,
but really just updating your VBO.
This is the simple way
to call mat buffer.
Then you modify your data.
Mat buffer returns a pointer to the data.
So you use that pointer
to update the data.
And then you call unmat
buffer when you're finished.
And then the pointer that it
returned to you becomes invalid and
any changes to it are undefined.
Crash, my crash, might at least,
very least not get noticed
by the graphics card.
The Flush Buffer Range extension, though,
allows you to update a portion of the
VBO data and you to tell GL what changed.
So in the prefix example
with map and then un-map,
GL's going to be forced to
copy your entire buffer when
it needs to put it back on the
graphics card for fast access.
And this extension relieves of
that responsibility because your
app's going to tell exactly just
which specific pieces of the
vertex data that it changed.
And the code for that
just looks like this.
So step one is
A promise to OpenGL that you are going
to manually flush your modified data.
So, I'm
Then step two is just the same.
Map buffer it, returns a pointer.
Step three is the same.
Modify the VBO.
Step 4 is where you flush,
explicitly flush what you modified.
So if you had a megabyte of
vertex data and you changed,
you know, 256 bytes of it,
and you just flush that,
then OpenGL can absorb
that change very quickly,
you know, transfer it to the graphics
card for caching or whatever
it's going to do with it,
and then when you call unmap buffer,
that's not going to do anything
because you already manually
flushed what you were going to do.
So what does that do
for your performance?
So this chart shows the yellow
line is the performance of --
So, we took this data from
updating 0% of the data up to,
you know,
90%. At 100%, you kind of expect
the two things to converge.
And the red line, curiously,
shows the performance of buffer sub-data,
which really shows that that's not
a very optimal way to integrate
the 3D graphics pipeline.
And the red line, curiously,
shows the performance of buffer sub-data,
which really shows that that's not a
very optimal way to update your data.
So, I have to mention at this point
that this kind of performance tuning
can be sensitive to many things.
It can be sensitive to
your data alignment,
interleaving,
Data size.
So it's really, you know,
if you remember the code that we saw,
it's easy enough to just try the
different techniques inside your code to
see what's the best performance for you.
But I think in our experience,
map and map used with flush buffer range,
you know, pretty much always
provides the best answer.
So vertex buffer objects allow
you to capture and manipulate,
switch quickly between
vertex array state.
Pixel buffer objects accomplish
the same thing for image data.
This shares the API,
a lot of API with the
VertexBuffer object.
It uses the same memory
management hints with the static,
dynamic and stream.
The same call to map and unmap
to get access to the data,
same calls to specify the data.
It's also possible to overlap the
internal storage for PBO and VBO.
And what that allows you to do is,
you know, generate some data with one
and consume it with another.
So you can generate image data,
copy that to a PBO and then reuse
that as Vertex data without incurring
a round trip through the CPU.
And we have some sample
code that shows that.
I think we had a demo of this last year.
But it's interesting and
if you're interested,
you should check that out.
So, Pixelbuffer objects provide
cross-platform way to implement
some things that we've provided
platform specific thing -- platform
specific ways to do before.
Pixelbuffer objects encompass
some of the functionality of
texture range and client storage.
And it also is a supported
cross-platform API to use to get
non-blocking read pixels behavior,
which we'll see in a minute.
And you can use a Pixelbuffer object
with any API that uses images,
takes images from the GL entries,
draw pixels, read pixels,
any of the texture entry points,
anything that takes an image.
So the read pixels thing,
this is how you call read pixels.
So this has the disadvantage
of -- when you call this,
the graphics card has queued up commands.
So it's working ahead and your
app is running ahead of it.
So when you call read pixels,
you force the whole queued up buffer
stream to -- or command buffer stream
to get consumed and then the result
to get read back into your pointer.
And so it will not only bring the
-- not return until that's finished,
but it also completely flushes out
the graphics system and then you're
going the next time you want to
render to try to get ahead of it.
With pixel buffer objects,
you can do this in a way that won't stop
the command stream from getting executed.
It won't force it to finish.
The way you do this is you bind a pixel
buffer object as the pixel pack buffer.
Pack is for OpenGL giving you data.
Unpack is for OpenGL taking
data from you.
So pack buffer.
And then you call read_pixels.
Instead of sending read_pixels a pointer,
when you're using a pixel buffer object,
you send it an offset.
So we set offset to zero.
So we set write this to the
beginning of my pixel buffer object.
And then the important part of this
is that you have to do other work.
So the read_pixels command
will get queued up.
And then you want to go off
and do some other things.
And then when you call map_buffer,
this is the call that will either
return immediately if the buffer got
cleared out and the read came back.
This will return immediately.
Otherwise, it'll block here waiting
on that to happen.
And then when you're finished that,
you call unmap_buffer telling
GL you're done with the pointer
that it returned to you.
And then that should go off
into to be undefined again.
And you're done with accessing any of
the kind of data that it put in there.
So just to kind of finish
off the BufferObjects here,
it allows you to do some things that
we had OS X specific extensions to do.
I mentioned the Pixel BufferObject
to do asynchronous read pixels.
We used to suggest using copy text
and get text image to do that.
Pixel BufferObjects is cross
platform and well supported.
Apple vertex array range was an
extension that we used to have to
allow you to specify some things about
your vertex array to OpenGL like,
okay, I want you to map this into the
GPU space and then you had to
manually flush when you changed it.
And vertex BufferObjects
accomplished the same thing.
Axle -- Apple Pixel Buffers were the --
was the API to do off screen drawing.
And Frame BufferObjects
provides the same thing.
We'll talk about that in a minute.
But Frame BufferObjects has
other advantages for sharing
objects and things like that.
And then the text range
extension is somewhat encompassed
by Pixel BufferObjects.
So, I
If you haven't learned everything
you want to know about this now,
the ARB specifications for these
extensions are really good.
They include pseudo-sample
code that is illustrative.
The FlushBuffer range extension
is posted on developer.apple.com.
Also, I believe,
with some sample code in it to show you,
you know,
everything you want to know about that.
And the code I mentioned to do the
overlapped PBO and VBO behavior
is up on developer.apple.com.
And then NVIDIA's developer
Web site has a paper that kind
of dives into the details of the
differences between string draw,
static draw, and, you know,
stream copy and those different things.
So if you are interested in that topic,
that's a good place to
go for that information.
Okay, so buffer objects allow you to get
some asynchronous behavior going.
So, you know,
allow the GPU to keep working and reduce
the amount of data that gets copied
from system memory to GPU memory and
reduces the number of stalls in the pipe.
So we're going to talk about another way
to keep the graphics card humming along.
And we titled this
section data recycling.
But what we really mean by this is
using the GPU to generate some data,
capturing that data on the GPU,
and then sending it back into the
system in subsequent rendering
and avoiding the round trips to
the CPU enhances your performance,
keeps the card busy.
So the first thing is
framebuffer objects.
So this is the encapsulation
of a render target.
And what that means is you can render
to some data that stays on the GPU and
then you can reuse that as source data,
perhaps in a texture,
in other rendering that follows.
So one of the nice things about
framebuffer objects over pbuffers is
that there's no context switch overhead.
So the FBOs all live in
the same OpenGL context.
So you make one context
and all your objects,
textures and programs, et cetera,
are shared there without having
to go to all the pain that I'm
sure some of you have to share
data between multiple GL contexts.
And we mentioned that it
was cross-platform array for
off-screen drawing and simple,
you and easy to use as a texture.
and I'm gonna go through just a
brief code sample on the slide here.
This is the simple code you
execute to create an FBO.
You can attach a -- as the drawable you
can attach a render buffer or a texture.
In this example,
we're going to create a texture.
This is just the same as creating
any other texture in GL except
we're specifying null as the
storage for the texture because it's
gonna use the FBO as the storage.
So we created the texture.
And then this call binds the
texture as an attachment to the FBO.
So drawing to this FBO as the drawable
is going to get captured in the texture.
So now we're going to
draw something in it.
So we're going to draw a duck.
Any rendering that you do here will
go into the current draw buffer,
which is the FBO at this point.
But now we're going to go
back to the system draw,
so the normal color buffer.
Call blind frame buffer zero.
It takes you back to the
default system drawable.
And then we're going to bind
texture to the texture and use
it to draw into the color buffer.
So that's interesting.
Hopefully you use the results graph lots
of times to save you some rendering time.
Before we leave FBOs,
I should mention that you can
have in FBOs per context and
switch between them at will.
And you can also--each FBO can
have depth stencil attachments
as well as color attachments.
And so it's a full functioning drawable.
So right now,
I'm going to bring Alex Eddy up here,
and he's going to take you through
even more ways to capture intermediate
rendering results and reuse them
in hopefully an interesting way.
Okay, thanks, Kent.
So continuing on with the
theme of generating data on
the GPU and recycling it,
I want to talk in particular about
two modern OpenGL extensions,
Transform Feedback and Geometry Shaders.
And I'll finish up with a
little demo demonstrating how
to combine those two things.
So first up is Transform Feedback.
So this extension,
ext transform feedback,
is really like a modern version of
the feedback mode that's been built
into OpenGL since the very beginning.
But what is feedback?
What does that mean?
Well, we're talking about recycling data.
This is really a way to get at
the intermediate results of the
vertex transformation stage.
If you think about the pipeline,
you're passing in vertex positions,
for example, and you might do a model of
your matrix times that position.
And normally that result is sent on to
be -- turns to a triangle or an asterisk.
But this is a way to get
that intermediate result of
that vertex transformation
and get it back to the CPU.
The big difference here with
this extension is that instead
of sending the data to the CPU,
you can write it directly
into a buffer object.
So once you have data in a buffer object,
you can really use it any way you like.
It's up to you,
depending on how your data
flow wants to be structured.
If you want to,
you can cache that data and
then reuse it multiple times.
And typically,
you're going to feed it into another
shader for additional processing.
So, buffer objects are really flexible,
and you have several different
choices of how you feed data into
additional shaders to that point.
You could treat that data in the
buffer as vertex attributes and
use it as a vertex buffer object.
Or you could use it as a pixel
buffer object and call techimage
using that buffer object as the
data source and feed that data in
as pixels and a texture to a shader.
There's also a new extension,
extbinaluniform,
which will let you pass that buffer
object in as an arbitrary array of
data in a uniform to a new shader.
This extension also has a
switch which allows you to
optionally discard rasterization.
So instead of capturing the data from
transfer feedback into a buffer and
not seeing any result on the screen,
you can simultaneously capture
it to a buffer and rasterize
it as triangles on the screen.
So depending, again,
what you want to do with your data flow,
one or the other might be
a better choice for you.
I also want to point out that
we've been shipping this extension
for a little while now in Leopard,
but the specification was
just recently posted online.
So if you're trying to find it,
it's now up there on opengl.org.
You can go there and
check out all the details.
So there are a lot of different
ways to use this in an application,
but to give an illustration of
one concrete data flow here,
this is kind of the standard pipeline
of how data moves through the screen.
You start out with some data
in a buffer object here,
let's say it's vertex positions again,
and you feed that to your vertex shader.
You use some transformations
like you multiply with the
Model-View projection matrix,
maybe you do some lighting,
whatever you're going to do there.
And normally those vertices come
out and they're assembled into
primitives like lines or triangles.
They go to the rasterizer,
get rasterized by the fragment shader,
and the results are into the display.
Well, with transfer feedback now you can
get a tap into that pipeline right
after the Vertex Shader executes.
You can write those results,
all the variants that are
coming out of the Vertex Shader,
directly into a buffer object.
Like I was saying then,
you typically are going to
pass this on to another shader.
And you can see how now you can
build up a loop in the pipeline
here internally on the GPU.
And repeat that as
many times as you like.
Transforming some data with a shader,
get it into a buffer object,
transform it again in a different way,
get it into another buffer object.
Maybe you cache it and
reuse it several times.
So this is pretty flexible.
And let me jump into some code here
to show how to set it up and use it.
The first thing I'm doing here is
defining a constant array of strings.
These are the literal names of
the variants in Unreal Associated
that you want to capture.
You send that array into this new API,
transfer feedback variances,
along with a mode parameter.
And the mode parameter here is either
going to be interleaved or separate.
So in this example,
I'm only capturing one variant,
the position.
So it doesn't really make any difference
if I use interleaved or separate.
But if you're capturing multiple things,
you have a choice of writing all
those variances in interleaved
order into one buffer object.
Or if it suits your data flow better,
you could write each individual
variant into a separate buffer.
It's up to you.
After you've told OpenGL which variants
you're interested in capturing,
you need to link the program.
And also, at that point,
you would gen some buffer objects and
be sure to call buffer data allocating
enough space to capture all of the
vertices you're going to be capturing.
So a little later on at draw time,
you would set up drawing like usual,
binding a source buffer and setting
the pointers for all the attributes
that you're going to be using,
and also bind this new transform
feedback target with the destination
buffer you're going to be writing into.
Once the source and destination pointers
are all set up for OpenGL to draw,
you bracket your drawing
with these two new calls,
beginTransformFeedback
and endTransformFeedback.
Everything that you draw in between
that will be processed by the shader,
and the results will be written
down to the buffer object
for use however you like.
So there are a couple more
details here which you can
look up in the specification,
but that's really about it.
It's pretty easy to
set this up and use it.
You don't need very much code at all.
So moving on to an example of
something you might be interested in
capturing with transfer of feedback,
we have geometry shaders.
So what is a Geometer shader?
This is actually a really interesting
and kind of powerful new development in
the hardware that OpenGL is exposing.
And it's a completely new stage in the
pipeline that happens in between the
vertex shader and the fragment shader.
And so for the first time now,
you can process entire primitives
like a line segment or a triangle.
There's also some new adjacency modes
which allow you to process the vertices
around a line or around a triangle,
which really enables you to
do much more complicated types
of algorithms on the GPU.
Once you have more than
one vertex to work on,
you can do things like calculate
the area of a triangle or the
face number of a triangle,
or you can start to look at the curvature
of a line or the curvature of a 3D mesh.
So inside the shader you have an array
of inputs and all the vertices are
available for you to look at there.
A geometry shader also has the
ability to dynamically create
new vertices during execution.
So inside of your shader,
you have full flow control ability,
so you can build up new
primitives depending on any kind
of logic that you want to write.
And the output of the
geometry shader is vertices,
which are then assembled as usual into
points or lines or triangle strips.
So this kind of generalizes
to a one-in-and-out problem,
which, as I said,
is really a lot more powerful
than the old pipeline where you're
working on one vertex at a time.
So diving in a little bit,
we're going to cover
some key points here.
There are a couple of new functions
added to the GLSL Shading Language.
And most important there is
this emit vertex function.
So to explain that,
I'm going to draw a parallel
with how vertex shaders work.
In a vertex shader,
you're setting all of the
variants that you care about.
Like you might output the
position and the color,
maybe some texture coordinates.
And the vertex shader is done executing,
a vertex pops out and it's done.
The geometry shader works the same way,
except that you can explicitly
create a vertex by calling
this emit vertex function.
After that point,
you're free to then set a new position
or a new color or a modified texture
coordinate and emit another vertex,
and so on and so on,
building up as much as you like
within some reasonable hardware limit.
So another key language difference
here is that all of the outputs from
the vertex shader are visible as
arrays of input in the geometry shader.
Because you're going to be
working on multiple vertices,
like three vertices in a triangle,
you can access them with
this array notation.
So if I was up in positions
in the vertex shader,
those are visible as position
in with this array notation,
and I access 0 and 1 and 2 elements to
get all three vertices in a triangle.
The other new API here
is Program Parameter,
which you need in order to
tell OpenGL what type of
geometry shader this is.
Since you're working on an array here,
the geometry shader has to work
on a specific type of primitive.
And this is how you do that.
You need to tell OpenGL what
is the input type.
Are you going to be processing points or
lines or triangles or adjacency modes?
and also tell OpenGL what the output
type is so that it knows how to
assemble the vertices that you're
creating inside the geometry shader.
There's also this limit,
max vertices out, and...
You need to tell OpenGL what is the
maximum number of vertices that you're
going to be generating during one
execution of the geometry shader.
So there is a hardware-specific
limit to that number,
but in general,
you want to try to keep that as low as
possible to allow maximum efficiency to
get as many hardware threads executing in
your shader simultaneously as possible.
After you've told
OpenGL these parameters,
you need to link your program.
And then later on at draw time,
you draw like usual using a primitive
mode that matches the input type of the
geometry shader that you've specified.
So looking at a very simple
shader here as an example.
Here this shader is working
on points coming in,
and it converts every point
to a triangle going out.
So you can see here that I'm
taking the position that was
written by the vertex shader,
and it's being accessed
through this array,
position in.
Since I'm working on points,
I'm only looking at the 0-th element,
and it's just adding a very simple,
hard coded offset in
the x and y directions.
So this is emitting the
same vertex three times,
and it's of splatting a
triangle around that point.
Not very useful,
but it's an illustration.
So you can check out the extension
specification online for all
the rest of the details here.
And I want to spend a little time
talking about some of the things
you can do with this technology now.
So here's a simple
example to start out with.
I mentioned that you have access
to the tessellation-- or sorry,
you have access to the
curvature of your mesh.
You pass in data with adjacency.
So it's possible to do
tessellation now on the GPU,
so a very simple, paper doll stick figure
mesh going into the shader.
And you can calculate a kind of
bicubic spline running through all
those points and then dynamically
generate as many line shapes as
you feel like to make it look good.
And you also have flow
control in the shader,
so you can conditionally deform or
move or warp or whatever you feel
like specific line segments just
depending on any logic you want.
So in this case, I'm growing hair only on
the head of that model.
So looking at a little
more complicated example,
it's also possible now to accelerate
some algorithms that we've had for a
while but had to be executed on the CPU.
So a good example here is
Shadow Vauln Extrusion,
which you've probably seen
in some games like Doom 3.
this type of algorithm,
you need to know really the
topology of the model that you're
looking at in order to figure
out something like the silhouette
from the light's point of view.
So in the geometry shader you can figure
that out because you have access to the
triangle and the adjacent triangles.
So with any given triangle you
can figure out the face normal,
and if you take the dot product of the
face normal with the light position,
you can figure out if a given triangle is
facing towards the light and the adjacent
triangle is facing away from the light,
then you know you're
at the silhouette edge.
Once you find the
You can then dynamically generate
in the Jumper Shader new triangles
only for triangles that have an
edge of the silhouette and project
a volume away from the light source.
You can write that into the
stencil buffer and end up with
nice self-shadowing characters
like in video games now.
So there's really an infinite number
of things that you could do here.
This is a couple simple examples.
And to give you one more idea trying to
combine this with transfer of feedback,
I'm going to move over
to the demo machine.
So I have here an everyday,
ordinary wine glass.
And I was working together with my
coworker John Rososco on this demo,
and we were trying to come up with a
visually interesting way to combine
a couple of these extensions.
And John had the good idea of trying
to simulate what happens to glass
as you heat it up to melting point.
So, in addition to the wine glass,
I have a virtual blowtorch.
Which I can rub over the
glass and start to heat it up.
And it'll start to melt and deform.
And it's always going to move
down towards the bottom of
the screen due to gravity.
So if I heat it up a little bit,
I can kind of rotate it around like this.
You can watch it kind of melt
and deform and fold into itself,
right?
So if I'm really clever,
I can kind of set up a little
virtual glass blowing kit here,
if I get the spin right on this thing.
And I can, you know,
heat up the rim maybe.
Over time,
the heat will dissipate and the stem
now is kind of fused into a new,
deformed position.
And then you heat up the RAM,
flip it up like this,
watch it kind of melt on top of itself.
Right?
Pretty cool, right?
So this is kind of neat looking,
but how is this working?
What's going on here?
So to break this down,
let me turn off all the
eye candy for a second.
And what you can see here is that I'm
starting out with a really simple,
coarsely tessellated input mesh.
And there are basically two stages in
this algorithm that make this work.
The first stage is dealing with
heating up the vertices and
deforming them into a new shape.
The second stage is using an enjompto
shader to tessellate that result into
a higher polygon version of itself.
So looking at the first
stage really briefly,
there's a vertex shader which,
for every vertex in this mesh,
figures out how close is the heat source.
And if it's close enough,
it'll start to inject heat into it.
And there's a gravity vector which
pulls all the hot vertices downwards.
So what you're looking at
here is a visualization of
the heat at every vertex.
So the results of this shader execution
are being captured with transfer
feedback into a buffer object.
And so what's going on
here is that each frame,
the input mesh is fed into the shader and
it's melted and deformed a little bit.
And the good thing about this
is I have a reset button.
And the deformed shape is
captured back into a buffer.
And then the next frame,
we feed that buffer into the same shader,
and we warp and deform
it a little bit more.
So we're basically tracking the
current state of the mesh at
all times in a buffer object,
which can be kept in
video memory on the GPU.
So there's no round trip of data here.
It's all fast and local.
So this same shader also deals
with recalculating the normals
on every vertex in every frame.
And this is done by feeding that
same BufferObject in as a texture to
the shader using PixelBufferObject.
And I can do a couple texture samples
around the vertex to figure out all
the connectivity of the mesh there.
And I can calculate a
bunch of face normals.
I can average those into a vertex normal.
So I need to do this in order to keep
the normals accurate regardless of
how much the mesh has been distorted.
I need this for the next step,
which is tessellation.
So to explain tessellation a little bit,
let me jump to a very simple example,
just one triangle.
So every triangle has a face normal,
which here are in purple.
And you can calculate the average
vertex normals like I just described,
which here are in yellow.
So once you have those vertex normals,
if you imagine those interpolating
across the face of this main triangle,
you can kind of reconstruct an idealized
curved surface that fits the curvature
of this local area with the mesh.
And inside the geometry shader,
you can then emit a bunch of triangles
to try to approximate that ideal
curved surface by displacing the
triangle in the direction of the normal.
And you can do that at some arbitrary
level of detail as long as you stay
within a reasonable hardware limit.
So there are a couple of different
ways to do this tessellation,
but this particular
version is called NPatches.
And ATI has a white paper written
up about it if you're interested.
It's up on the AMD website now.
So that's tessellation on one triangle.
You apply the same algorithm then to
every triangle in this input mesh.
And I start out with a pretty coarse,
chunky-looking thing.
Tessellation might take it from a
couple hundred input vertices to tens
of thousands of output vertices here.
So we've got a deformation shader,
plus normal recalculation,
plus a jump shader
doing tessellation here.
Then you combine that
with a fragment shader,
which is here.
It's using a cubic environment map to
simulate reflection and refraction.
And actually here,
The refraction is doing a little bit
of a dispersive chromatic effect.
So, you know,
there's a separate ray for the red,
green, and blue.
I can play around with the index
refraction here if I want to.
So combine all these things
together and you get a kind of
good-looking eye candy demo.
So what do you think?
So I'll just let this go
for a little bit maybe.
It's fun to play around with.
So in general,
I think the message here is
that you're not really limited
to the old fixed-solution
pipeline in any way anymore.
GLSL and shaders have kind
of blown all that away.
And now, additionally,
there's enough flexibility in the
way you use the pipeline that you can
build up really complicated multi-stage
algorithms and keep them all on the GPU.
So generate some data,
stick it in a buffer object,
do a second pass on it, cache it,
use it ten different times,
ten different ways,
whatever you feel like.
You can implement really more
advanced algorithms this way now.
So that's about it.
I just encourage you all to go
check out the specifications,
get the details, and really start playing
around with the stuff yourself.
So that's it.
I'm going to hand it back to Kent now.
So now we go from a cool spinning
melting wine glasses back to slides.
That'll go well.
Okay, so we're going to talk about some
more ways to sound the GPU now.
There are some new features of
GLSL that allow you to implement more
classes of algorithms on the GPU.
So I'm gonna talk about GPU Shader 4
for a second along with Texture Integer.
But GPU Shader 4 is an extension
to GLSL that allows you to do full
integer operations in a shader.
You can do ands, shifts, you know, knots,
all that fun binary stuff.
And the Texture Integer extension,
the distinction of that between the
regular integer data that you could
already pass in OpenGL is that the data
is left intact with no conversions.
If you use the GLN data type,
That really signals to OpenGL that
you've passed it a color that is,
you know, that the value of zero is 0.0
and FFFFF is 1.0 color data.
But the texture-injury extension
destroys that implicit conversion
that might happen otherwise.
So,
[Transcript missing]
Another extension that we
are just adding support for,
it's going to be in Snow Leopard,
but it also started to appear in 10.5.3,
is FrameBuffer_Blit.
So this extension has two tricks,
basically.
It separates the draw
and read framebuffers,
so now you can have a separate
framebuffer that's going to be read
from with all the read operations,
and then the draw operations will
take effect on the draw framebuffer.
It also adds the Blit
framebuffer function,
which is a fast copy
between framebuffer objects.
So this is kind of like a 2D Blit API,
a stretch Blit or copy bits or whatever.
I kind of think of it like copy bits.
Anyway,
so it not only can copy straight away,
it can also scale.
It can also copy depth
and stencil buffers,
any of the attachments to
the framebuffer object.
And you can also specify a filter.
When you use,
when you're copying depth and stencil,
the nearest filter is all that applies.
But in this next example, if you,
if you're just copying color,
you can apply a linear filter to
that and you'll get some nice,
you know, linear style.
So you can see that
interpolation on the source data.
And also in this example,
it's inverting the data,
so it's flipping it, I guess,
left or right in this one.
So it scales it down
and it's flipping it.
So this might be an interesting way if
you wanted to use it to address some,
you know, there's a problem with
flipped data in OpenGL.
It kind of reads it upside down
from what you might expect.
This might be something you could
do to try to program around that.
Frame Buffer Multi-Sample is an extension
that allows you to create off-screen,
multi-sampled FBOs.
So it's an extension to the
Render Buffer Storage API,
which is the type of attachment
we didn't show before,
we showed a texture attachment.
But this will create a multi-sampled FBO.
And it basically is just like the
other Render Buffer Storage API,
but you pass in the number
of samples that you want.
This example passes in four.
You can pass in, you know,
any number the card supports
or you can pass in one,
which is a special value that means,
you know, give me any multi-sample
format you support.
So there's one more API that
was new in Leopard and that's
the object purgeable extension.
So I don't believe we
talked about this last year,
but this is an OX10 specific extension.
And basically what it allows you to
do is promise GL that on this object,
say a texture,
that you are not going to require
that GL retains the storage right now.
So this is great if you want to really
bombard the system with textures.
That you don't know if you're
going to use all of them or not.
Or you might create something and
then want to allow GL to throw it away
if it needs the space for something.
If you're working in a constrained
memory space or whatever
reason you'd want to do that.
So in this case, if GL does decide to
throw away the storage,
it's still going to retain the
state and the name of the texture.
Everything associated with
it except for the storage.
So this probably will work.
It's going to be a little bit easier to
look at if you just look at the code.
What this does is this code
is going to create a texture.
So maybe you're starting
up a photo application.
So it's going to kind of chug
through your library in the
background and maybe create textures.
Big textures.
But instead of loading
the system up with it,
it's going to make them all
purgeable as it loads them.
So object purgeable apple.
Volatile apple.
So that's a promise
from your application.
Before you use the texture,
you're going to check to see if
it needs to redefine the storage.
So in step two,
time has passed and you've decided
that lo and behold you do want
to use that object that you made.
So you call object unpurgable
with retained apple as the flag.
So this is going to do two things.
First of all,
it's going to return to you a value
that indicates whether it kept that
texture around or not or that object
around in this case a texture.
But -- And then the second thing
it's going to do is it's going to
make this object unpurgable again.
So when you call this,
then it's not going to
purge this object anymore.
So it returns -- if it returns,
if it does not return retain,
then you need to recreate the object.
If it returns retain, you don't have to.
So then after that, you draw.
And then later on,
if you're finished with the object and
you want to go back to that state where
you want GL to throw it away if it can,
you just call object purgeable
again with the volatile flag.
So,
brings us to using OpenGL with OpenCL.
So, we've talked about asynchronous
behavior using vertex buffer objects,
pixel buffer objects.
We talked about generating
data with geometry shaders,
so new data.
We talked about using transform
feedback and framebuffer objects
to capture intermediate results.
And this is another way that we have
to generate some data in the system.
So since OpenGL and OpenCL are obviously
running on the same graphics card,
one of the major advantages we have is
that the storage objects can be shared.
So
you can share OpenCL vertex
buffer objects with OpenCL arrays
and I didn't realize when I was
preparing this that this was
actually before the OpenCL sessions,
but -- so I'll try to take
that into account here,
but the vertex buffer objects
-- so OpenCL array is a 1D
piece of memory to OpenCL.
Textures and render buffers can be images
and that's kind of self-explanatory.
It's a 2D array or 3D array in OpenCL.
All the commands that deal with
using GL and CL objects together
are included in the CL framework,
OpenCL framework, in that file,
OpenCL_GL.h.
So, and this is just a small piece
of code that allows you to create
a--create a CL context that shares
objects with the GL context,
so with a pre-existing GL context,
which you might have got CGL context from
calling maybe CGL get current context,
or maybe you saved it earlier,
but--so you call CL create
device group from CGL context,
and that returns a group of cards,
which will be the same group that
you created your GL context on.
And then you pass that
in to CL create context,
and then you've got it
set up to share objects.
So this is kind of how that would work.
So you make a buffer object,
a vertex buffer object,
just with standard GL API there.
Genbuffers, bindbuffer,
and GL buffer data.
So to make the object sharing
work well between GL and CL,
then we're going to
use a static draw VBO.
So we're going to give it
the static draw hint there.
And then in step two there,
we're creating a CL array.
So the important thing
there is in orange,
the mem alloc reference,
which tells CL that the storage
for this object is going to come
from another object instead of,
you know, having to allocate its own.
Then when we're ready
to use that together,
we're going to attach the
array and VBO together.
So seal attach deal buffer,
compute context, array to VBO.
So then they internally get references
to the same storage object on the card,
storage object on the card.
And those two calls are,
I'll go over with some code here
in a second on the demo machine,
but that's how you execute a seal kernel.
And then sometime later,
before you dispose everything,
you don't have to do it right
after you execute the kernel,
but that detaches the array
from the other storage object.
And then you can use the storage object.
So, I have some code over here on the
demo machine that illustrates this.
Wow, that's neat.
Let's open it like this.
Okay.
So this is a short program.
You know,
it's just maybe 100 lines or 150.
There's two parts to this
I wanted to point out.
This is more or less the same piece of
code that we just looked at on the slide,
but this is how simple it is
to attach a VBO to a CL array.
It uses the same flags,
the static draw VBO to the MIM-alloc
reference CL array that we saw before.
And then we're going to
attach them right away.
And then the other thing
that's interesting here,
and I guess since we haven't
looked at any CL code before,
probably,
this is the routine in this program
that executes the CL kernel.
So, you know,
you set up an array of sizes of the data,
and then you set the values for
that data in the values array,
and then you call setKernelArgs.
And real quickly,
I'll show you the CL kernel
itself for this example.
And so...
You can see here that the kernel
args end up being the arguments
to the CL kernel that it executes.
So that's how you pass data
into the OpenCL function.
It's kind of, I guess,
I've drawn analogous to me to using
uniforms passing into a shader.
So that is-- so you set the KernelArgs,
and then you execute the kernel.
And then the results of that
get written into the VBO.
And then in the DisplayRoutine here,
we're just calling updateMesh,
and then we're calling drawRays
to just get the data out.
And the result of that is this little,
neat, geometric point cloud thing.
So, you know, every frame,
the CL kernel is running and
transforming the data from the
previous state to the next state.
And then when it's finished,
then we're just calling
drawRays on the VBO,
on the bound VBO,
and getting the point results out.
Can we switch back to slides, please?
So...
For any more information about
CL or anything we talked about,
Alan Schaffer is our evangelist.
And his email is actually
not email@apple.com.
Maybe it is.
I don't think it is.
If you need to contact Alan seriously,
you can talk to me afterwards and
I'll get you his correct address.
The Mac OpenGL mailing list,
myself and most of my engineers
are pretty active on that list.
At least we do, I think,
read every message that comes across,
even though we might not
have an immediate answer.
We do at least see it and
we'll answer if we can.
If we know the answer,
it's not that we can't,
but we may not know.
And then there's documentation on
the developer.apple.com website.
We have a pretty good OpenGL and
OS X programming guide that
explains some of these offscreen
rendering techniques as well as,
you know, a lot of platform things
for working on OS X.
There's extension documentation up
there for most of the extensions
that we support and all of the
Apple specific extensions that we have.
And there's also a sample code,
the sample code we mentioned,
as well as some others up there.